feat: dev setup (#81)
KILTprotocol/docs: docs/develop/sdk/1-dev-setup.md

---
id: dev-setup
title: Development Setup
---
import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';
import Example1 from '!!raw-loader!@site/code-examples/core_features/dev_setup.ts';

> If you want to develop a DApp, Wallet, web3 login or similar you will need a running blockchain that doesn't require you to buy KILT just to develop and test the next big thing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to develop a DApp, Wallet, web3 login or similar, you will need a running blockchain that doesn't require you to buy KILT just to develop and test the next big thing.
```

> For that you can use the peregrine network.

Reviewer: I was wondering in #71 about (not) capitalizing Peregrine and Spiritnet and think, we should capitalize as they are [proper nouns](https://www.grammarly.com/blog/capitalization-rules/).

Author: Ok I'm capitalizing it. 👍

The peregrine network is a parachain that is similar to the spiritnet (our mainnet) in functionality, but it's coin, the PILT, doesn't hold any monetary value.

> New features that we add to our blockchain will first be tested on peregrine before they are introduced to the spiritnet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
New features that we add to our blockchain, will first be tested on Peregrine before they are introduced to the Spiritnet.
```

This gives you the chance to test your software with the newest blockchain features, before they are available on the mainnet.

Even though the peregrine network is convenient, there are a scenarios where a public network is not the right choice for developers.
If you need more funds than the faucet can provide, or if you need to reset the state of the blockchain, you will need to setup your own little KILT blockchain.

> How this works will be explained in here.

Reviewer: I would like to summarize the goal of this page here in 1-2 sentences.

```suggestion

Below, we will guide you through the process of connecting to the Peregrine network as well as running your own KILT blockchain.
Moreover, we will explain the difference between our _Standalone_ and _Parachain_ runtimes Peregrine/Spiritnet.
```

## Setup your Project

> Before we can connect to our blockchain we need create a small project that can connect to the chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before we can connect to our blockchain, we need to create a small project that can connect to the chain.
```

For that create a new directory and initialize a new project.

> We are also adding the KILT SDK, typescript and a couple of peer dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are also adding the KILT SDK, TypeScript and a couple of peer dependencies.
```

> ```bash npm2yarn

Reviewer: 🔥 I did not know that _macro_!

npm init -y

> npm install @kiltprotocol/sdk-js@0.27.0 ts-node typescript @polkadot/keyring@8.7.1 @polkadot/util@8.7.1 @polkadot/util-crypto@8.7.1 @types/node

Reviewer: Maybe make it more readable by adding new lines?
```suggestion
npm install @kiltprotocol/sdk-js@0.27.0 \
 ts-node \
 typescript \
 @types/node
 @polkadot/keyring@8.7.1 \
 @polkadot/util@8.7.1 \
 @polkadot/util-crypto@8.7.1 \
```

```

> After all these dependencies are added we will add a simple script that prints the balance of a couple of well known development accounts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After all these dependencies are added, we will add a simple script that prints the balance of a couple of well known development accounts.
```

<CodeBlock className="language-js">
  {Example1}
</CodeBlock>

Copy the above code into index.ts.
You can know execute the script:

```bash npm2yarn
npm exec ts-node index.ts
```

The output should look like this:

```
Seed //Alice has account id 4siJtc4dYq2gPre8Xj6KJcSjVAdi1gmjctUzjf3AwrtNnhvy and 0
Seed //Bob has account id 4r99cXtVR72nEr9d6o8NZGXmPKcpZ9NQ84LfgHuVssy91nKb and 0
```

None of the development accounts have usable balance on the public peregrine network.

## BYOB - Bring Your Own Blockchain

> If you don't want to rely on peregrine, need more funds or want to reset the state of your transactions you will need to run your own blockchain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you don't want to rely on peregrine, need more funds or want to reset the state of your transactions, you will need to run your own blockchain.
```

2022-05-05 13:25:12 ⛓  Native runtime: mashnet-node-10620 (mashnet-node-0.tx3.au4)
2022-05-05 13:25:13 🔨 Initializing Genesis block/state (state: 0xb4a2…94b3, header-hash: 0x09fc…3a2b)
2022-05-05 13:25:13 👴 Loading GRANDPA authority set from genesis on what appears to be first startup.
2022-05-05 13:25:14 Using default protocol ID "sup" because none is configured in the chain specs
2022-05-05 13:25:14 🏷  Local node identity is: 12D3KooWMCqWaxXTQbmG9feCe4cMzjCzUKfm5T6VvGDmh8X5QHe9
2022-05-05 13:25:14 📦 Highest known block at #0
2022-05-05 13:25:14 〽️ Prometheus exporter started at 127.0.0.1:9615
2022-05-05 13:25:14 Listening for new connections on 0.0.0.0:9944.
2022-05-05 13:25:19 💤 Idle (0 peers), best: #0 (0x09fc…3a2b), finalized #0 (0x09fc…3a2b), ⬇ 0 ⬆ 0
2022-05-05 13:25:20 Accepted a new tcp connection from 172.17.0.1:56636.
2022-05-05 13:25:23 🙌 Starting consensus session on top of parent 0x...
2022-05-05 13:25:23 🎁 Prepared block for proposing at 1 (3 ms) [hash: 0x...; parent_hash: 0x09fc…3a2b; extrinsics (1): [0xae1a…0701]]
2022-05-05 13:25:23 🔖 Pre-sealed block for proposal at 1. Hash now 0x..., previously 0x....
```

Congratulations!
You are running your own blockchain. 🎉

> The blockchain exposes a websocket endpoint on port `9944` and a RPC endpoint on port `9933`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The blockchain exposes a websocket endpoint on port `9944` and an RPC endpoint on port `9933`.
```

You can test that by first calling an RPC endpoint using curl.

```
curl -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"id":1, "jsonrpc":"2.0", "method": "system_name", "params":[]}' http://127.0.0.1:9933/
```

This should give you `{"jsonrpc":"2.0","result":"KILT Node","id":1}` as a response.

But you can also connect to the websocket endpoints using our little script above.
Simple replace the peregrine address `wss://peregrine.kilt.io/parachain-public-ws` with `ws://127.0.0.1:9944`.
Note that we connect to the port `9944` as we are using the websocket protocol for our SDK and not bare http.

> 

Reviewer: IMO, the script should rather focus on the local endpoint. See my comment above.

> ## Standalone vs Mainnet (Spiritnet)

Reviewer: It's rathe Standalone vs. Parachain (Peregrine/Spiritnet) though?
```suggestion
## Standalone vs. Parachain (Peregrine testnet/Spiritnet mainnet)
```

The standalone chain is very close in functionality to our parachains but there are a few fundamental differences between them.

<!-- ### Blocktime

Block time is actually the same, but this might change in the future. -->

> 

Reviewer: I would love a _set diagram_ here visualizing the differences. But that can be done in a separate PR (see my top review comment).

### Governance

> While governance is a very important part of our paracahains it is not used in the standalone version and replaced by the sudo pallet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While governance is a very important part of our parachains, it is not used in the standalone version and replaced by the sudo pallet.
```

Any of the following pallets are not part of the standalone chain, but part of the parachain runtime:

* Democracy
* Council
* TechnicalCommittee
* TechnicalMembership
* Treasury
* Scheduler

### Staking

Staking is a feature that is used to elect who is allowed to produce blocks.

> It is important for parachains to do this election as decentralized as possible.

Reviewer: I am unsure whether this is the wording we want to go with. If you do a decentralized election, it does not imply the result will be decentralized. However, as a parachain we want the latter.

```suggestion
It is important for parachains to have this election as decentralized as possible.
```

But for a local development chain it is not necessary since you will be the only one producing blocks.

### Deployment Complexity

The complexity to deploy a parachain is way higher than the one of the standalone chain.
For the standalone node, you simple execute a single docker command.

> The task of spinning up a parachain can be split up in three steps.

Reviewer: Can we link to the _parachain-setup_ repository somewhere in this paragaph?

1. Setup a relay chain with 4 validators.
2. Start and connect your parachain node to the relaychain.

> 3. register your parachain using the Runtime WASM and the genesis state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Register your parachain using the runtime WASM and the genesis state.
```

> These three steps

Reviewer: I suppose you meant to delete this?
```suggestion
```

Author: No i wanted to write some more text there but was interrupted. 😁

Author: this PR is still WIP BTW

Reviewer: Ah sorry, I thought it would be done.

Reviewer 2: WHY IS IT NOT MARKED AS A DRAFT?!!!?!11!

Author: haha

Author: surprise surprise!

---
id: dev-setup
title: Development Setup
---
import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';
import Example1 from '!!raw-loader!@site/code-examples/core_features/dev_setup.ts';

> If you want to develop a DApp, Wallet, web3 login or similar, you will need a running blockchain that doesn't require you to buy KILT just to develop and test the next big thing.

Reviewer 2: Not sure what style we want to have for the docs, but I am personally not a big fan of using `you` in the docs. I would rather keep it impersonal. But if it has been agreed we want to have an informal style, then we should rather have all the pages use the same style.

Author: I don't know either 🤔

Reviewer 2: I'll give it a try before merging this PR, if you let me.

Reviewer 2: As discussed, we'll postpone this to a later date.

For that you can use the peregrine network.

> The peregrine network is a parachain that is similar to the spiritnet (our mainnet) in functionality, but it's coin, the PILT, doesn't hold any monetary value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The peregrine network is a parachain that is similar to the spiritnet (our mainnet) in functionality, but its coin, the PILT, doesn't hold any monetary value.
```

Author: [8c84d17](https://github.com/KILTprotocol/docs/pull/81/commits/8c84d176a0b5b32280de5d3d720e8a5a93fd22be)

New features that we add to our blockchain, will first be tested on Peregrine before they are introduced to the Spiritnet.
This gives you the chance to test your software with the newest blockchain features, before they are available on the mainnet.

Even though the peregrine network is convenient, there are a scenarios where a public network is not the right choice for developers.
If you need more funds than the faucet can provide, or if you need to reset the state of the blockchain, you will need to setup your own little KILT blockchain.

Below, we will guide you through the process of connecting to the Peregrine network as well as running your own KILT blockchain.

> Moreover, we will explain the difference between our _Standalone_ and _Parachain_ runtimes Peregrine/Spiritnet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Below, we will guide you through the process of connecting to the Peregrine network as well as running your own KILT blockchain.
Moreover, we will explain the difference between our _Standalone_ and _Parachain_ runtimes.
```

> ## Setup your Project

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Set up your project
```

> Before we can connect to our blockchain, we need to create a small project that can connect to the chain.

Reviewer 2: This is a bit confusing. I guess we are not revealing the dev accounts for the Peregrine network, right? Then we should make it clear somewhere.

Author: [4658905](https://github.com/KILTprotocol/docs/pull/81/commits/46589052755ad7ed8e637e6d8184913c46a4096b)

Author: hope that makes it a bit clearer?

Reviewer 2: Good enough! 👍

For that create a new directory and initialize a new project.
We are also adding the KILT SDK, TypeScript and a couple of peer dependencies.

```bash npm2yarn
npm init -y
npm install @kiltprotocol/sdk-js@0.27.0 \
 ts-node \
 typescript \
 @types/node
 @polkadot/keyring@8.7.1 \
 @polkadot/util@8.7.1 \
 @polkadot/util-crypto@8.7.1 \
```

After all these dependencies are added, we will add a simple script that prints the balance of a couple of well known development accounts.

<CodeBlock className="language-js">
  {Example1}
</CodeBlock>

Copy the above code into index.ts.
You can know execute the script:

```bash npm2yarn

> npm exec ts-node index.ts

Reviewer 2: This shows a `# couldn't auto-convert command` in the docs. I think it's sufficient to use `npm run ts-node index.ts`.

Author: That gives me:

```
❯ npm run ts-node dev_setup.ts 
npm ERR! Missing script: "ts-node"
npm ERR! 
npm ERR! To see a list of scripts, run:
npm ERR!   npm run

npm ERR! A complete log of this run can be found in:
npm ERR!     /Users/albrecht/.npm/_logs/2022-05-12T07_46_03_455Z-debug-0.log
```

aa24424fe4e42ecc9108e92e4795fb9302179db6

I add `ts-node` globally and just removed the yarn/npm call thing. hope that fixes something

Reviewer 2: Interesting that also in the workshop we use `npm2yarn` only to install dependencies, but the actual run commands always only use yarn. Not sure how to fix that.

Author: if ts-node is installed globally you can just call it from the cli. But `yarn add global` is not translated by npm2yarn :(

```

The output should look like this:

```
Seed //Alice has account id 4siJtc4dYq2gPre8Xj6KJcSjVAdi1gmjctUzjf3AwrtNnhvy and 0
Seed //Bob has account id 4r99cXtVR72nEr9d6o8NZGXmPKcpZ9NQ84LfgHuVssy91nKb and 0
```

> None of the development accounts have usable balance on the public peregrine network.

Reviewer 2: As I mentioned above, is there any specific reason to actually guide users through this for Peregrine, to then find out at the end that the accounts have no usable balance?

Author: Yes the reason is that i want to mention the dev accounts. But I also want to keep it simple. So instead of heaving two versions for peregrine and standalone I have one version for both and the reader learns that the dev accounts have funds on the local chain but not on peregrine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
None of the development accounts have usable balance on the public Peregrine network.
```

## BYOB - Bring Your Own Blockchain

> If you don't want to rely on peregrine, need more funds or want to reset the state of your transactions, you will need to run your own blockchain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you don't want to rely on peregrine, need more funds or need to periodically reset the state of the blockchain, you will need to run your own blockchain.
```

```

Congratulations!
You are running your own blockchain. 🎉

The blockchain exposes a websocket endpoint on port `9944` and an RPC endpoint on port `9933`.
You can test that by first calling an RPC endpoint using curl.

```
curl -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"id":1, "jsonrpc":"2.0", "method": "system_name", "params":[]}' http://127.0.0.1:9933/
```

This should give you `{"jsonrpc":"2.0","result":"KILT Node","id":1}` as a response.

But you can also connect to the websocket endpoints using our little script above.
Simple replace the peregrine address `wss://peregrine.kilt.io/parachain-public-ws` with `ws://127.0.0.1:9944`.
Note that we connect to the port `9944` as we are using the websocket protocol for our SDK and not bare http.

## Standalone vs. Parachain (Peregrine testnet/Spiritnet mainnet)

The standalone chain is very close in functionality to our parachains but there are a few fundamental differences between them.

<!-- ### Blocktime

Block time is actually the same, but this might change in the future. -->

### Governance

While governance is a very important part of our parachains, it is not used in the standalone version and replaced by the sudo pallet.

> Any of the following pallets are not part of the standalone chain, but part of the parachain runtime:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
None of the following pallets is part of the standalone chain, but they are all part of the parachain runtime:
```

Author: Isn't it `are` since there are multiple pallets?
```suggestion
None of the following pallets are part of the standalone chain, but they are all part of the parachain runtime:
```

Reviewer 2: I think you are right 👍

* Democracy
* Council
* TechnicalCommittee
* TechnicalMembership
* Treasury
* Scheduler

### Staking

Staking is a feature that is used to elect who is allowed to produce blocks.
It is important for parachains to have this election as decentralized as possible.
But for a local development chain it is not necessary since you will be the only one producing blocks.

### Deployment Complexity

> The complexity to deploy a parachain is way higher than the one of the standalone chain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Deploying a parachain is more complext than deploying a standalone chain.
```

---
id: dev-setup
title: Development Setup
---
import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';
import Example1 from '!!raw-loader!@site/code-examples/core_features/dev_setup.ts';

If you want to develop a DApp, Wallet, web3 login or similar, you will need a running blockchain that doesn't require you to buy KILT just to develop and test the next big thing.
For that you can use the Peregrine network.
The Peregrine network is a parachain that is similar to the Spiritnet (our mainnet) in functionality, but its coin, the PILT, doesn't hold any monetary value.
New features that we add to our blockchain, will first be tested on Peregrine before they are introduced to the Spiritnet.
This gives you the chance to test your software with the newest blockchain features, before they are available on the mainnet.

> Even though the peregrine network is convenient, there are a scenarios where a public network is not the right choice for developers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Even though the Peregrine network is convenient, there are a scenarios where a public network is not the right choice for developers.
```

## Set up your project

Before we can connect to our blockchain, we need to create a small project that can connect to the chain.
For that create a new directory and initialize a new project.
We are also adding the KILT SDK, TypeScript and a couple of peer dependencies.

```bash
yarn init -y
yarn add @kiltprotocol/sdk-js@0.27.0 \
    @polkadot/keyring@8.7.1 \
    @polkadot/util@8.7.1 \
    @polkadot/util-crypto@8.7.1
yarn add -D ts-node \
    typescript \
    @types/node
```

After all these dependencies are added, we will add a simple script that prints the balance of a couple of well known development accounts.

<CodeBlock className="language-js">
  {Example1}
</CodeBlock>

Copy the above code into index.ts.
You can know execute the script:

```bash
yarn exec ts-node index.ts
```

The output should look like this:

```
Seed //Alice has account id 4siJtc4dYq2gPre8Xj6KJcSjVAdi1gmjctUzjf3AwrtNnhvy and 0
Seed //Bob has account id 4r99cXtVR72nEr9d6o8NZGXmPKcpZ9NQ84LfgHuVssy91nKb and 0
```

None of the development accounts have usable balance on the public peregrine network.

## BYOB - Bring Your Own Blockchain

> If you don't want to rely on peregrine, need more funds or need to periodically reset the state of the blockchain, you will need to run your own blockchain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you don't want to rely on Peregrine, need more funds or need to periodically reset the state of the blockchain, you will need to run your own blockchain.
```

2022-05-05 13:25:14 📦 Highest known block at #0
2022-05-05 13:25:14 〽️ Prometheus exporter started at 127.0.0.1:9615
2022-05-05 13:25:14 Listening for new connections on 0.0.0.0:9944.
2022-05-05 13:25:19 💤 Idle (0 peers), best: #0 (0x09fc…3a2b), finalized #0 (0x09fc…3a2b), ⬇ 0 ⬆ 0
2022-05-05 13:25:20 Accepted a new tcp connection from 172.17.0.1:56636.
2022-05-05 13:25:23 🙌 Starting consensus session on top of parent 0x...
2022-05-05 13:25:23 🎁 Prepared block for proposing at 1 (3 ms) [hash: 0x...; parent_hash: 0x09fc…3a2b; extrinsics (1): [0xae1a…0701]]
2022-05-05 13:25:23 🔖 Pre-sealed block for proposal at 1. Hash now 0x..., previously 0x....
```

Congratulations!
You are running your own blockchain. 🎉

The blockchain exposes a websocket endpoint on port `9944` and an RPC endpoint on port `9933`.
You can test that by first calling an RPC endpoint using curl.

```
curl -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"id":1, "jsonrpc":"2.0", "method": "system_name", "params":[]}' http://127.0.0.1:9933/
```

This should give you `{"jsonrpc":"2.0","result":"KILT Node","id":1}` as a response.

But you can also connect to the websocket endpoints using our little script above.

> Simple replace the peregrine address `wss://peregrine.kilt.io/parachain-public-ws` with `ws://127.0.0.1:9944`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Simple replace the Peregrine address `wss://peregrine.kilt.io/parachain-public-ws` with `ws://127.0.0.1:9944`.
```

Note that we connect to the port `9944` as we are using the websocket protocol for our SDK and not bare http.

## Standalone vs. Parachain (Peregrine/Spiritnet)

The standalone chain is very close in functionality to our parachains but there are a few fundamental differences between them.

<!-- ### Blocktime

Block time is actually the same, but this might change in the future. -->

### Governance

While governance is a very important part of our parachains, it is not used in the standalone version and replaced by the sudo pallet.
None of the following pallets are part of the standalone chain, but they are all part of the parachain runtime:

* Democracy
* Council
* TechnicalCommittee
* TechnicalMembership
* Treasury
* Scheduler

### Staking

Staking is a feature that is used to elect who is allowed to produce blocks.
It is important for parachains to have this election as decentralized as possible.
But for a local development chain it is not necessary since you will be the only one producing blocks.

### Deployment Complexity

> Deploying a parachain is more complext than deploying a standalone chain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Deploying a parachain is more complex than deploying a standalone chain.
```

For the standalone node, you simple execute a single docker command.
The task of spinning up a parachain can be split up in three steps.

1. Setup a relay chain with 4 validators.
2. Start and connect your parachain node to the relaychain.
3. Register your parachain using the runtime WASM and the genesis state.

> Since these steps are not trivial to execute and take quite some time to do by hand, we started a [docker based setup](https://github.com/KILTprotocol/local-parachain-setup) which automates these steps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since these steps are not trivial to execute and take quite some time to do by hand, we provide a minimal [docker based setup](https://github.com/KILTprotocol/local-parachain-setup) which automates these steps.
```

### Transaction Encoding

> Before transactions are send to the chain, they are encoded and signed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before transactions are sent to the chain, they are encoded and signed.
```

Copy the above code into index.ts.
You can know execute the script:

```bash

> ts-node index.ts

Reviewer 2: If you are not using `npm2yarn` anymore, then it is sufficient to keep the same installation instructions as before, and just run `yarn ts-node index.ts`.

Reviewer 2: Meaning that there's no need to install ts-node globally.

Author: yeah i only use yarn now
[075b539](https://github.com/KILTprotocol/docs/pull/81/commits/075b5393079b540aad3e80e51cca5183d2b02e40)

You can know execute the script:

```bash

> yarn exec ts-node index.ts

Reviewer 2: I think simply `yarn ts-node index.ts` works, no?

Author: Might be? I always do exec because it's not a script in the `package.json` and `yarn xyz` most of the time refer to something defined in `scripts` section

Reviewer 2: That's what we also explain everywhere in the workshop, e.g. in https://github.com/KILTprotocol/docs/blob/develop/docs/develop/workshop/04-claimer/02-request.md?plain=1#L60=

Author: [efd821e](https://github.com/KILTprotocol/docs/pull/81/commits/efd821e68190b96f07c04eefcbec234ec4bb68c2)
